The Da Vinci Code 

Dan Brown 

Prologue 

Louvre Museum, Paris 10:46 P.M. 

Renowned curator Jacques Sauniere staggered through the vaulted archway of the museum's Grand 
Gallery. He lunged for the nearest painting he could see, a Caravaggio. Grabbing the gilded frame, 
the seventy- six-year-old man heaved the masterpiece toward himself until it tore from the wall and 
Sauniere collapsed backward in a heap beneath the canvas. 

As he had anticipated, a thundering iron gate fell nearby, barricading the entrance to the suite. The 
parquet floor shook. Far off, an alarm began to ring. 

The curator lay a moment, gasping for breath, taking stock. / am still alive. He crawled out from 
under the canvas and scanned the cavernous space for someplace to hide. 

A voice spoke, chillingly close. "Do not move." 

On his hands and knees, the curator froze, turning his head slowly. 

Only fifteen feet away, outside the sealed gate, the mountainous silhouette of his attacker stared 
through the iron bars. He was broad and tall, with ghost-pale skin and thinning white hair. His 



irises were pink with dark red pupils. The albino drew a pistol from his coat and aimed the barrel 
through the bars, directly at the curator. "You should not have run." His accent was not easy to 
place. "Now tell me where it is." 

"I told you already," the curator stammered, kneeling defenseless on the floor of the gallery. "I 
have no idea what you are talking about!" 

"You are lying." The man stared at him, perfectly immobile except for the glint in his ghostly eyes. 
"You and your brethren possess something that is not yours." 

The curator felt a surge of adrenaline. How could he possibly know this? 

"Tonight the rightful guardians will be restored. Tell me where it is hidden, and you will live." The 
man leveled his gun at the curator's head. "Is it a secret you will die for?" 

Sauniere could not breathe. 

The man tilted his head, peering down the barrel of his gun. 

Sauniere held up his hands in defense. "Wait," he said slowly. "I will tell you what you need to 
know." The curator spoke his next words carefully. The lie he told was one he had rehearsed many 
times... each time praying he would never have to use it. 

When the curator had finished speaking, his assailant smiled smugly. "Yes. This is exactly what the 
others told me." 

Sauniere recoiled. The others? 

"I found them, too," the huge man taunted. "All three of them. They confirmed what you have just 
said." 

It cannot be! The curator's true identity, along with the identities of his three senechaux, was 
almost as sacred as the ancient secret they protected. Sauniere now realized his senechaux, 
following strict procedure, had told the same lie before their own deaths. It was part of the 
protocol. 

The attacker aimed his gun again. "When you are gone, I will be the only one who knows the 
truth." 

The truth. In an instant, the curator grasped the true horror of the situation. If I die, the truth will be 
lost forever. Instinctively, he tried to scramble for cover. 

The gun roared, and the curator felt a searing heat as the bullet lodged in his stomach. He fell 



forward... struggling against the pain. Slowly, Sauniere rolled over and stared back through the 
bars at his attacker. 

The man was now taking dead aim at Sauniere's head. 

Sauniere closed his eyes, his thoughts a swirling tempest of fear and regret. 

The click of an empty chamber echoed through the corridor. 

The curator's eyes flew open. 

The man glanced down at his weapon, looking almost amused. He reached for a second clip, but 
then seemed to reconsider, smirking calmly at Sauniere's gut. "My work here is done." 

The curator looked down and saw the bullet hole in his white linen shirt. It was framed by a small 
circle of blood a few inches below his breastbone. My stomach. Almost cruelly, the bullet had 
missed his heart. As a veteran of la Guerre d'Algerie, the curator had witnessed this horribly drawn- 
out death before. For fifteen minutes, he would survive as his stomach acids seeped into his chest 
cavity, slowly poisoning him from within. 

"Pain is good, monsieur," the man said. 

Then he was gone. 

Alone now, Jacques Sauniere turned his gaze again to the iron gate. He was trapped, and the doors 
could not be reopened for at least twenty minutes. By the time anyone got to him, he would be 
dead. Even so, the fear that now gripped him was a fear far greater than that of his own death. 

/ must pass on the secret. 

Staggering to his feet, he pictured his three murdered brethren. He thought of the generations who 
had come before them... of the mission with which they had all been entrusted. 

An unbroken chain of knowledge. 

Suddenly, now, despite all the precautions... despite all the fail-safes... Jacques Sauniere was the 
only remaining link, the sole guardian of one of the most powerful secrets ever kept. 

Shivering, he pulled himself to his feet. 

/ must find some way.... 

He was trapped inside the Grand Gallery, and there existed only one person on earth to whom he 



could pass the torch. Sauniere gazed up at the walls of his opulent prison. A collection of the 
world's most famous paintings seemed to smile down on him like old friends. 

Wincing in pain, he summoned all of his faculties and strength. The desperate task before him, he 
knew, would require every remaining second of his life. 



CHAPTER 1 

Robert Langdon awoke slowly. 

A telephone was ringing in the darkness — a tinny, unfamiliar ring. He fumbled for the bedside 
lamp and turned it on. Squinting at his surroundings he saw a plush Renaissance bedroom with 
Louis XVI furniture, hand-frescoed walls, and a colossal mahogany four-poster bed. 

Where the hell am I? 

The jacquard bathrobe hanging on his bedpost bore the monogram: HOTEL RITZ PARIS. 

Slowly, the fog began to lift. 

Langdon picked up the receiver. "Hello?" 

"Monsieur Langdon?" a man's voice said. "I hope I have not awoken you?" 

Dazed, Langdon looked at the bedside clock. It was 12:32 A.M. He had been asleep only an hour, 
but he felt like the dead. 

"This is the concierge, monsieur. I apologize for this intrusion, but you have a visitor. He insists it 
is urgent." 

Langdon still felt fuzzy. A visitor? His eyes focused now on a crumpled flyer on his bedside table. 

THE AMERICAN UNIVERSITY OF PARIS 

proudly presents 

AN EVENING WITH ROBERT LANGDON 

PROFESSOR OF RELIGIOUS SYMBOLOGY, 

HARVARD UNIVERSITY 



Langdon groaned. Tonight's lecture — a slide show about pagan symbolism hidden in the stones of 
Chartres Cathedral — had probably ruffled some conservative feathers in the audience. Most likely, 



some religious scholar had trailed him home to pick a fight. 

"I'm sorry," Langdon said, "but I'm very tired and — " 

"Mais, monsieur, " the concierge pressed, lowering his voice to an urgent whisper. "Your guest is 
an important man." 

Langdon had little doubt. His books on religious paintings and cult symbology had made him a 
reluctant celebrity in the art world, and last year Langdon's visibility had increased a hundredfold 
after his involvement in a widely publicized incident at the Vatican. Since then, the stream of self- 
important historians and art buffs arriving at his door had seemed never-ending. 

"If you would be so kind," Langdon said, doing his best to remain polite, "could you take the man's 
name and number, and tell him I'll try to call him before I leave Paris on Tuesday? Thank you." He 
hung up before the concierge could protest. 

Sitting up now, Langdon frowned at his bedside Guest Relations Handbook, whose cover boasted: 
SLEEP LIKE A BABY IN THE CITY OF LIGHTS. SLUMBER AT THE PARIS RITZ. He 
turned and gazed tiredly into the full-length mirror across the room. The man staring back at him 
was a stranger — tousled and weary. 

You need a vacation, Robert. 

The past year had taken a heavy toll on him, but he didn't appreciate seeing proof in the mirror. His 
usually sharp blue eyes looked hazy and drawn tonight. A dark stubble was shrouding his strong 
jaw and dimpled chin. Around his temples, the gray highlights were advancing, making their way 
deeper into his thicket of coarse black hair. Although his female colleagues insisted the gray only 
accentuated his bookish appeal, Langdon knew better. 

//"Boston Magazine could see me now. 

Last month, much to Langdon's embarrassment, Boston Magazine had listed him as one of that 
city's top ten most intriguing people — a dubious honor that made him the brunt of endless ribbing 
by his Harvard colleagues. Tonight, three thousand miles from home, the accolade had resurfaced 
to haunt him at the lecture he had given. 

"Ladies and gentlemen..." the hostess had announced to a full house at the American University of 
Paris's Pavilion Dauphine, "Our guest tonight needs no introduction. He is the author of numerous 
books: The Symbology of Secret Sects, The An of the Illuminati, The Lost Language of Ideograms, 
and when I say he wrote the book on Religious Iconology, I mean that quite literally. Many of you 
use his textbooks in class." 

The students in the crowd nodded enthusiastically. 



"I had planned to introduce him tonight by sharing his impressive curriculum vitae. However..." 
She glanced playfully at Langdon, who was seated onstage. "An audience member has just handed 
me a far more, shall we say... intriguing introduction." 

She held up a copy of Boston Magazine. 

Langdon cringed. Where the hell did she get that? 

The hostess began reading choice excerpts from the inane article, and Langdon felt himself sinking 
lower and lower in his chair. Thirty seconds later, the crowd was grinning, and the woman showed 
no signs of letting up. "And Mr. Langdon's refusal to speak publicly about his unusual role in last 
year's Vatican conclave certainly wins him points on our intrigue-o-meter." The hostess goaded the 
crowd. "Would you like to hear more?" 

The crowd applauded. 

Somebody stop her, Langdon pleaded as she dove into the article again. 

"Although Professor Langdon might not be considered hunk-handsome like some of our younger 
awardees, this forty-something academic has more than his share of scholarly allure. His 
captivating presence is punctuated by an unusually low, baritone speaking voice, which his female 
students describe as 'chocolate for the ears.' " 

The hall erupted in laughter. 

Langdon forced an awkward smile. He knew what came next — some ridiculous line about 
"Harrison Ford in Harris tweed" — and because this evening he had figured it was finally safe again 
to wear his Harris tweed and Burberry turtleneck, he decided to take action. 

"Thank you, Monique," Langdon said, standing prematurely and edging her away from the 
podium. "Boston Magazine clearly has a gift for fiction." He turned to the audience with an 
embarrassed sigh. "And if I find which one of you provided that article, I'll have the consulate 
deport you." 

The crowd laughed. 

"Well, folks, as you all know, I'm here tonight to talk about the power of symbols..." 



The ringing of Langdon's hotel phone once again broke the silence. 



Groaning in disbelief, he picked up. "Yes?" 

As expected, it was the concierge. "Mr. Langdon, again my apologies. I am calling to inform you 
that your guest is now en route to your room. I thought I should alert you." 

Langdon was wide awake now. "You sent someone to my room?" 

"I apologize, monsieur, but a man like this... I cannot presume the authority to stop him." 

"Who exactly is he?" 

But the concierge was gone. 

Almost immediately, a heavy fist pounded on Langdon's door. 

Uncertain, Langdon slid off the bed, feeling his toes sink deep into the savonniere carpet. He 
donned the hotel bathrobe and moved toward the door. "Who is it?" 

"Mr. Langdon? I need to speak with you." The man's English was accented — a sharp, authoritative 
bark. "My name is Lieutenant Jerome Collet. Direction Centrale Police Judiciaire." 

Langdon paused. The Judicial Police? The DCPJ was the rough equivalent of the U.S. FBI. 

Leaving the security chain in place, Langdon opened the door a few inches. The face staring back 
at him was thin and washed out. The man was exceptionally lean, dressed in an official-looking 
blue uniform. 

"May I come in?" the agent asked. 

Langdon hesitated, feeling uncertain as the stranger's sallow eyes studied him. "What is this all 
about?" 

"My capitaine requires your expertise in a private matter." 

"Now?" Langdon managed. "It's after midnight." 

"Am I correct that you were scheduled to meet with the curator of the Louvre this evening?" 

Langdon felt a sudden surge of uneasiness. He and the revered curator Jacques Sauniere had been 
slated to meet for drinks after Langdon's lecture tonight, but Sauniere had never shown up. "Yes. 
How did you know that?" 

"We found your name in his daily planner." 



"I trust nothing is wrong?" 

The agent gave a dire sigh and slid a Polaroid snapshot through the narrow opening in the door. 

When Langdon saw the photo, his entire body went rigid. 

"This photo was taken less than an hour ago. Inside the Louvre." 

As Langdon stared at the bizarre image, his initial revulsion and shock gave way to a sudden 
upwelling of anger. "Who would do this!" 

"We had hoped that you might help us answer that very question, considering your knowledge in 
symbology and your plans to meet with him." 

Langdon stared at the picture, his horror now laced with fear. The image was gruesome and 
profoundly strange, bringing with it an unsettling sense of deja vu. A little over a year ago, 
Langdon had received a photograph of a corpse and a similar request for help. Twenty-four hours 
later, he had almost lost his life inside Vatican City. This photo was entirely different, and yet 
something about the scenario felt disquietingly familiar. 

The agent checked his watch. "My capitaine is waiting, sir." 

Langdon barely heard him. His eyes were still riveted on the picture. "This symbol here, and the 
way his body is so oddly..." 

"Positioned?" the agent offered. 

Langdon nodded, feeling a chill as he looked up. "I can't imagine who would do this to someone." 

The agent looked grim. "You don't understand, Mr. Langdon. What you see in this photograph..." 
He paused. "Monsieur Sauniere did that to himself." 



CHAPTER 2 

One mile away, the hulking albino named Silas limped through the front gate of the luxurious 
brownstone residence on Rue La Bruyere. The spiked cilice belt that he wore around his thigh cut 
into his flesh, and yet his soul sang with satisfaction of service to the Lord. 

Pain is good. 



His red eyes scanned the lobby as he entered the residence. Empty. He climbed the stairs quietly, 
not wanting to awaken any of his fellow numeraries. His bedroom door was open; locks were 
forbidden here. He entered, closing the door behind him. 

The room was spartan — hardwood floors, a pine dresser, a canvas mat in the corner that served as 
his bed. He was a visitor here this week, and yet for many years he had been blessed with a similar 
sanctuary in New York City. 

The Lord has provided me shelter and purpose in my life. 

Tonight, at last, Silas felt he had begun to repay his debt. Hurrying to the dresser, he found the cell 
phone hidden in his bottom drawer and placed a call. 

"Yes?" a male voice answered. 

"Teacher, I have returned." 

"Speak," the voice commanded, sounding pleased to hear from him. 

"All four are gone. The three senechaux... and the Grand Master himself." 

There was a momentary pause, as if for prayer. "Then I assume you have the information?" 

"All four concurred. Independently." 

"And you believed them?" 

"Their agreement was too great for coincidence." 

An excited breath. "Excellent. I had feared the brotherhood's reputation for secrecy might prevail." 

"The prospect of death is strong motivation." 

"So, my pupil, tell me what I must know." 

Silas knew the information he had gleaned from his victims would come as a shock. "Teacher, all 
four confirmed the existence of the clef de voiite... the legendary keystone. " 

He heard a quick intake of breath over the phone and could feel the Teacher's excitement. "The 
keystone. Exactly as we suspected." 

According to lore, the brotherhood had created a map of stone — a clef de voiite... or keystone — an 
engraved tablet that revealed the final resting place of the brotherhood's greatest secret... 



information so powerful that its protection was the reason for the brotherhood's very existence. 

"When we possess the keystone," the Teacher said, "we will be only one step away." 

"We are closer than you think. The keystone is here in Paris." 

"Paris? Incredible. It is almost too easy." 

Silas relayed the earlier events of the evening... how all four of his victims, moments before death, 
had desperately tried to buy back their godless lives by telling their secret. Each had told Silas the 
exact same thing — that the keystone was ingeniously hidden at a precise location inside one of 
Paris's ancient churches — the Eglise de Saint- Sulpice. 

"Inside a house of the Lord," the Teacher exclaimed. "How they mock us!" 

"As they have for centuries." 

The Teacher fell silent, as if letting the triumph of this moment settle over him. Finally, he spoke. 
"You have done a great service to God. We have waited centuries for this. You must retrieve the 
stone for me. Immediately. Tonight. You understand the stakes." 

Silas knew the stakes were incalculable, and yet what the Teacher was now commanding seemed 
impossible. "But the church, it is a fortress. Especially at night. How will I enter?" 

With the confident tone of a man of enormous influence, the Teacher explained what was to be 
done. 



When Silas hung up the phone, his skin tingled with anticipation. 

One hour, he told himself, grateful that the Teacher had given him time to carry out the necessary 
penance before entering a house of God. / must purge my soul of today's sins. The sins committed 
today had been holy in purpose. Acts of war against the enemies of God had been committed for 
centuries. Forgiveness was assured. 

Even so, Silas knew, absolution required sacrifice. 

Pulling his shades, he stripped naked and knelt in the center of his room. Looking down, he 
examined the spiked cilice belt clamped around his thigh. All true followers of The Way wore this 
device — a leather strap, studded with sharp metal barbs that cut into the flesh as a perpetual 
reminder of Christ's suffering. The pain caused by the device also helped counteract the desires of 
the flesh. 



Although Silas already had worn his cilice today longer than the requisite two hours, he knew 
today was no ordinary day. Grasping the buckle, he cinched it one notch tighter, wincing as the 
barbs dug deeper into his flesh. Exhaling slowly, he savored the cleansing ritual of his pain. 

Pain is good, Silas whispered, repeating the sacred mantra of Father Josemaria Escriva — the 
Teacher of all Teachers. Although Escriva had died in 1975, his wisdom lived on, his words still 
whispered by thousands of faithful servants around the globe as they knelt on the floor and 
performed the sacred practice known as "corporal mortification." 

Silas turned his attention now to a heavy knotted rope coiled neatly on the floor beside him. The 
Discipline. The knots were caked with dried blood. Eager for the purifying effects of his own 
agony, Silas said a quick prayer. Then, gripping one end of the rope, he closed his eyes and swung 
it hard over his shoulder, feeling the knots slap against his back. He whipped it over his shoulder 
again, slashing at his flesh. Again and again, he lashed. 

Castigo corpus meum. 

Finally, he felt the blood begin to flow. 



CHAPTER 3 

The crisp April air whipped through the open window of the Citroen ZX as it skimmed south past 
the Opera House and crossed Place Vendome. In the passenger seat, Robert Langdon felt the city 
tear past him as he tried to clear his thoughts. His quick shower and shave had left him looking 
reasonably presentable but had done little to ease his anxiety. The frightening image of the 
curator's body remained locked in his mind. 

Jacques Sauniere is dead. 

Langdon could not help but feel a deep sense of loss at the curator's death. Despite Sauniere's 
reputation for being reclusive, his recognition for dedication to the arts made him an easy man to 
revere. His books on the secret codes hidden in the paintings of Poussin and Teniers were some of 
Langdon's favorite classroom texts. Tonight's meeting had been one Langdon was very much 
looking forward to, and he was disappointed when the curator had not shown. 

Again the image of the curator's body flashed in his mind. Jacques Sauniere did that to himself? 
Langdon turned and looked out the window, forcing the picture from his mind. 

Outside, the city was just now winding down — street vendors wheeling carts of candied amandes, 
waiters carrying bags of garbage to the curb, a pair of late night lovers cuddling to stay warm in a 



breeze scented with jasmine blossom. The Citroen navigated the chaos with authority, its dissonant 
two-tone siren parting the traffic like a knife. 

"he capitaine was pleased to discover you were still in Paris tonight," the agent said, speaking for 
the first time since they'd left the hotel. "A fortunate coincidence." 

Langdon was feeling anything but fortunate, and coincidence was a concept he did not entirely 
trust. As someone who had spent his life exploring the hidden interconnectivity of disparate 
emblems and ideologies, Langdon viewed the world as a web of profoundly intertwined histories 
and events. The connections may be invisible, he often preached to his symbology classes at 
Harvard, but they are always there, buried just beneath the surface. 

"I assume," Langdon said, "that the American University of Paris told you where I was staying?" 

The driver shook his head. "Interpol." 

Interpol, Langdon thought. Of course. He had forgotten that the seemingly innocuous request of all 
European hotels to see a passport at check-in was more than a quaint formality — it was the law. On 
any given night, all across Europe, Interpol officials could pinpoint exactly who was sleeping 
where. Finding Langdon at the Ritz had probably taken all of five seconds. 

As the Citroen accelerated southward across the city, the illuminated profile of the Eiffel Tower 
appeared, shooting skyward in the distance to the right. Seeing it, Langdon thought of Vittoria, 
recalling their playful promise a year ago that every six months they would meet again at a 
different romantic spot on the globe. The Eiffel Tower, Langdon suspected, would have made their 
list. Sadly, he last kissed Vittoria in a noisy airport in Rome more than a year ago. 

"Did you mount her?" the agent asked, looking over. 

Langdon glanced up, certain he had misunderstood. "I beg your pardon?" 

"She is lovely, no?" The agent motioned through the windshield toward the Eiffel Tower. "Have 
you mounted her?" 

Langdon rolled his eyes. "No, I haven't climbed the tower." 

"She is the symbol of France. I think she is perfect." 

Langdon nodded absently. Symbologists often remarked that France — a country renowned for 
machismo, womanizing, and diminutive insecure leaders like Napoleon and Pepin the 
Short — could not have chosen a more apt national emblem than a thousand-foot phallus. 

When they reached the intersection at Rue de Rivoli, the traffic light was red, but the Citroen didn't 



slow. The agent gunned the sedan across the junction and sped onto a wooded section of Rue 
Castiglione, which served as the northern entrance to the famed Tuileries Gardens — Paris's own 
version of Central Park. Most tourists mistranslated Jardins des Tuileries as relating to the 
thousands of tulips that bloomed here, but Tuileries was actually a literal reference to something far 
less romantic. This park had once been an enormous, polluted excavation pit from which Parisian 
contractors mined clay to manufacture the city's famous red roofing tiles — or tuiles. 

As they entered the deserted park, the agent reached under the dash and turned off the blaring siren. 
Langdon exhaled, savoring the sudden quiet. Outside the car, the pale wash of halogen headlights 
skimmed over the crushed gravel parkway, the rugged whir of the tires intoning a hypnotic rhythm. 
Langdon had always considered the Tuileries to be sacred ground. These were the gardens in which 
Claude Monet had experimented with form and color, and literally inspired the birth of the 
Impressionist movement. Tonight, however, this place held a strange aura of foreboding. 

The Citroen swerved left now, angling west down the park's central boulevard. Curling around a 
circular pond, the driver cut across a desolate avenue out into a wide quadrangle beyond. Langdon 
could now see the end of the Tuileries Gardens, marked by a giant stone archway. 

Arc du Carrousel. 

Despite the orgiastic rituals once held at the Arc du Carrousel, art aficionados revered this place for 
another reason entirely. From the esplanade at the end of the Tuileries, four of the finest art 
museums in the world could be seen... one at each point of the compass. 

Out the right-hand window, south across the Seine and Quai Voltaire, Langdon could see the 
dramatically lit facade of the old train station — now the esteemed Musee d'Orsay. Glancing left, he 
could make out the top of the ultramodern Pompidou Center, which housed the Museum of Modern 
Art. Behind him to the west, Langdon knew the ancient obelisk of Ramses rose above the trees, 
marking the Musee du Jeu de Paume. 

But it was straight ahead, to the east, through the archway, that Langdon could now see the 
monolithic Renaissance palace that had become the most famous art museum in the world. 

Musee du Louvre. 

Langdon felt a familiar tinge of wonder as his eyes made a futile attempt to absorb the entire mass 
of the edifice. Across a staggeringly expansive plaza, the imposing facade of the Louvre rose like a 
citadel against the Paris sky. Shaped like an enormous horseshoe, the Louvre was the longest 
building in Europe, stretching farther than three Eiffel Towers laid end to end. Not even the million 
square feet of open plaza between the museum wings could challenge the majesty of the facade's 
breadth. Langdon had once walked the Louvre's entire perimeter, an astonishing three-mile 
journey. 



Despite the estimated five days it would take a visitor to properly appreciate the 65,300 pieces of 
art in this building, most tourists chose an abbreviated experience Langdon referred to as "Louvre 
Lite" — a full sprint through the museum to see the three most famous objects: the Mona Lisa, 
Venus de Milo, and Winged Victory. Art Buchwald had once boasted he'd seen all three 
masterpieces in five minutes and fifty-six seconds. 

The driver pulled out a handheld walkie-talkie and spoke in rapid-fire French. "Monsieur Langdon 
est arrive. Deux minutes. " 

An indecipherable confirmation came crackling back. 

The agent stowed the device, turning now to Langdon. "You will meet the capitaine at the main 
entrance." 

The driver ignored the signs prohibiting auto traffic on the plaza, revved the engine, and gunned 
the Citroen up over the curb. The Louvre's main entrance was visible now, rising boldly in the 
distance, encircled by seven triangular pools from which spouted illuminated fountains. 

La Pyramide. 

The new entrance to the Paris Louvre had become almost as famous as the museum itself. The 
controversial, neomodern glass pyramid designed by Chinese-born American architect I. M. Pei 
still evoked scorn from traditionalists who felt it destroyed the dignity of the Renaissance 
courtyard. Goethe had described architecture as frozen music, and Pei's critics described this 
pyramid as fingernails on a chalkboard. Progressive admirers, though, hailed Pei's seventy-one-foot- 
tall transparent pyramid as a dazzling synergy of ancient structure and modern method — a 
symbolic link between the old and new — helping usher the Louvre into the next millennium. 

"Do you like our pyramid?" the agent asked. 

Langdon frowned. The French, it seemed, loved to ask Americans this. It was a loaded question, of 
course. Admitting you liked the pyramid made you a tasteless American, and expressing dislike 
was an insult to the French. 

"Mitterrand was a bold man," Langdon replied, splitting the difference. The late French president 
who had commissioned the pyramid was said to have suffered from a "Pharaoh complex." 
Singlehandedly responsible for filling Paris with Egyptian obelisks, art, and artifacts. 

Francois Mitterrand had an affinity for Egyptian culture that was so all-consuming that the French 
still referred to him as the Sphinx. 

"What is the captain's name?" Langdon asked, changing topics. 



"Bezu Fache," the driver said, approaching the pyramid's main entrance. "We call him le Taureau. " 

Langdon glanced over at him, wondering if every Frenchman had a mysterious animal epithet. 
"You call your captain the Bull?" 

The man arched his eyebrows. "Your French is better than you admit, Monsieur Langdon." 

My French stinks, Langdon thought, but my zodiac iconography is pretty good. Taurus was always 
the bull. Astrology was a symbolic constant all over the world. 

The agent pulled the car to a stop and pointed between two fountains to a large door in the side of 
the pyramid. "There is the entrance. Good luck, monsieur." 

"You're not coming?" 

"My orders are to leave you here. I have other business to attend to." 

Langdon heaved a sigh and climbed out. It's your circus. 

The agent revved his engine and sped off. 

As Langdon stood alone and watched the departing taillights, he realized he could easily 
reconsider, exit the courtyard, grab a taxi, and head home to bed. Something told him it was 
probably a lousy idea. 

As he moved toward the mist of the fountains, Langdon had the uneasy sense he was crossing an 
imaginary threshold into another world. The dreamlike quality of the evening was settling around 
him again. Twenty minutes ago he had been asleep in his hotel room. Now he was standing in front 
of a transparent pyramid built by the Sphinx, waiting for a policeman they called the Bull. 

I'm trapped in a Salvador Dali painting, he thought. 

Langdon strode to the main entrance — an enormous revolving door. The foyer beyond was dimly 
lit and deserted. 

Do I knock? 

Langdon wondered if any of Harvard's revered Egyptologists had ever knocked on the front door of 
a pyramid and expected an answer. He raised his hand to bang on the glass, but out of the darkness 
below, a figure appeared, striding up the curving staircase. The man was stocky and dark, almost 
Neanderthal, dressed in a dark double-breasted suit that strained to cover his wide shoulders. He 
advanced with unmistakable authority on squat, powerful legs. He was speaking on his cell phone 
but finished the call as he arrived. He motioned for Langdon to enter. 



"I am Bezu Fache," he announced as Langdon pushed through the revolving door. "Captain of the 
Central Directorate Judicial Police." His tone was fitting — a guttural rumble... like a gathering 
storm. 

Langdon held out his hand to shake. "Robert Langdon." 

Fache's enormous palm wrapped around Langdon's with crushing force. 

"I saw the photo," Langdon said. "Your agent said Jacques Sauniere himself did — " 

"Mr. Langdon," Fache's ebony eyes locked on. "What you see in the photo is only the beginning of 
what Sauniere did." 



CHAPTER 4 

Captain Bezu Fache carried himself like an angry ox, with his wide shoulders thrown back and his 
chin tucked hard into his chest. His dark hair was slicked back with oil, accentuating an arrow-like 
widow's peak that divided his jutting brow and preceded him like the prow of a battleship. As he 
advanced, his dark eyes seemed to scorch the earth before him, radiating a fiery clarity that forecast 
his reputation for unblinking severity in all matters. 

Langdon followed the captain down the famous marble staircase into the sunken atrium beneath the 
glass pyramid. As they descended, they passed between two armed Judicial Police guards with 
machine guns. The message was clear: Nobody goes in or out tonight without the blessing of 
Captain Fache. 

Descending below ground level, Langdon fought a rising trepidation. Fache's presence was 
anything but welcoming, and the Louvre itself had an almost sepulchral aura at this hour. The 
staircase, like the aisle of a dark movie theater, was illuminated by subtle tread-lighting embedded 
in each step. Langdon could hear his own footsteps reverberating off the glass overhead. As he 
glanced up, he could see the faint illuminated wisps of mist from the fountains fading away outside 
the transparent roof. 

"Do you approve?" Fache asked, nodding upward with his broad chin. 

Langdon sighed, too tired to play games. "Yes, your pyramid is magnificent." 

Fache grunted. "A scar on the face of Paris." 

Strike one. Langdon sensed his host was a hard man to please. He wondered if Fache had any idea 



that this pyramid, at President Mitterrand's explicit demand, had been constructed of exactly 666 
panes of glass — a bizarre request that had always been a hot topic among conspiracy buffs who 
claimed 666 was the number of Satan. 

Langdon decided not to bring it up. 

As they dropped farther into the subterranean foyer, the yawning space slowly emerged from the 
shadows. Built fifty-seven feet beneath ground level, the Louvre's newly constructed 70,000-square- 
foot lobby spread out like an endless grotto. Constructed in warm ocher marble to be compatible 
with the honey-colored stone of the Louvre facade above, the subterranean hall was usually vibrant 
with sunlight and tourists. Tonight, however, the lobby was barren and dark, giving the entire space 
a cold and crypt-like atmosphere. 

"And the museum's regular security staff?" Langdon asked. 

"En quarantaine, " Fache replied, sounding as if Langdon were questioning the integrity of Fache's 
team. "Obviously, someone gained entry tonight who should not have. All Louvre night wardens 
are in the Sully Wing being questioned. My own agents have taken over museum security for the 
evening." 

Langdon nodded, moving quickly to keep pace with Fache. 

"How well did you know Jacques Sauniere?" the captain asked. 

"Actually, not at all. We'd never met." 

Fache looked surprised. "Your first meeting was to be tonight?" 

"Yes. We'd planned to meet at the American University reception following my lecture, but he 
never showed up." 

Fache scribbled some notes in a little book. As they walked, Langdon caught a glimpse of the 
Louvre's lesser-known pyramid — La Pyramide Inversee — a huge inverted skylight that hung from 
the ceiling like a stalactite in an adjoining section of the entresol. Fache guided Langdon up a short 
set of stairs to the mouth of an arched tunnel, over which a sign read: DENON. The Denon Wing 
was the most famous of the Louvre's three main sections. 

"Who requested tonight's meeting?" Fache asked suddenly. "You or he?" 

The question seemed odd. "Mr. Sauniere did," Langdon replied as they entered the tunnel. "His 
secretary contacted me a few weeks ago via e-mail. She said the curator had heard I would be 
lecturing in Paris this month and wanted to discuss something with me while I was here." 



"Discuss what?" 

"I don't know. Art, I imagine. We share similar interests." 

Fache looked skeptical. "You have no idea what your meeting was about?" 

Langdon did not. He'd been curious at the time but had not felt comfortable demanding specifics. 
The venerated Jacques Sauniere had a renowned penchant for privacy and granted very few 
meetings; Langdon was grateful simply for the opportunity to meet him. 

"Mr. Langdon, can you at least guess what our murder victim might have wanted to discuss with 
you on the night he was killed? It might be helpful." 

The pointedness of the question made Langdon uncomfortable. "I really can't imagine. I didn't ask. 
I felt honored to have been contacted at all. I'm an admirer of Mr. Sauniere's work. I use his texts 
often in my classes." 

Fache made note of that fact in his book. 

The two men were now halfway up the Denon Wing's entry tunnel, and Langdon could see the 
twin ascending escalators at the far end, both motionless. 

"So you shared interests with him?" Fache asked. 

"Yes. In fact, I've spent much of the last year writing the draft for a book that deals with Mr. 
Sauniere's primary area of expertise. I was looking forward to picking his brain." 

Fache glanced up. "Pardon?" 

The idiom apparently didn't translate. "I was looking forward to learning his thoughts on the topic." 

"I see. And what is the topic?" 

Langdon hesitated, uncertain exactly how to put it. "Essentially, the manuscript is about the 
iconography of goddess worship — the concept of female sanctity and the art and symbols 
associated with it." 

Fache ran a meaty hand across his hair. "And Sauniere was knowledgeable about this?" 

"Nobody more so." 

"I see." 



Langdon sensed Fache did not see at all. Jacques Sauniere was considered the premiere goddess 
iconographer on earth. Not only did Sauniere have a personal passion for relics relating to fertility, 
goddess cults, Wicca, and the sacred feminine, but during his twenty-year tenure as curator, 
Sauniere had helped the Louvre amass the largest collection of goddess art on earth — labrys axes 
from the priestesses' oldest Greek shrine in Delphi, gold caducei wands, hundreds of Tjet ankhs 
resembling small standing angels, sistrum rattles used in ancient Egypt to dispel evil spirits, and an 
astonishing array of statues depicting Horus being nursed by the goddess Isis. 

"Perhaps Jacques Sauniere knew of your manuscript?" Fache offered. "And he called the meeting 
to offer his help on your book." 

Langdon shook his head. "Actually, nobody yet knows about my manuscript. It's still in draft form, 
and I haven't shown it to anyone except my editor." 

Fache fell silent. 

Langdon did not add the reason he hadn't yet shown the manuscript to anyone else. The three- 
hundred-page draft — tentatively titled Symbols of the Lost Sacred Feminine — proposed some very 
unconventional interpretations of established religious iconography which would certainly be 
controversial. 

Now, as Langdon approached the stationary escalators, he paused, realizing Fache was no longer 
beside him. Turning, Langdon saw Fache standing several yards back at a service elevator. 

"We'll take the elevator," Fache said as the lift doors opened. "As I'm sure you're aware, the gallery 
is quite a distance on foot. " 

Although Langdon knew the elevator would expedite the long, two-story climb to the Denon Wing, 
he remained motionless. 

"Is something wrong?" Fache was holding the door, looking impatient. 

Langdon exhaled, turning a longing glance back up the open-air escalator. Nothing's wrong at all, 
he lied to himself, trudging back toward the elevator. As a boy, Langdon had fallen down an 
abandoned well shaft and almost died treading water in the narrow space for hours before being 
rescued. Since then, he'd suffered a haunting phobia of enclosed spaces — elevators, subways, 
squash courts. The elevator is a perfectly safe machine, Langdon continually told himself, never 
believing it. It's a tiny metal box hanging in an enclosed shaft! Holding his breath, he stepped into 
the lift, feeling the familiar tingle of adrenaline as the doors slid shut. Two floors. Ten seconds. 

"You and Mr. Sauniere," Fache said as the lift began to move, "you never spoke at all? Never 
corresponded? Never sent each other anything in the mail?" 



Another odd question. Langdon shook his head. "No. Never." Fache cocked his head, as if making 
a mental note of that fact. Saying nothing, he stared dead ahead at the chrome doors. 

As they ascended, Langdon tried to focus on anything other than the four walls around him. In the 
reflection of the shiny elevator door, he saw the captain's tie clip — a silver crucifix with thirteen 
embedded pieces of black onyx. Langdon found it vaguely surprising. The symbol was known as a 
crux gemmata — a cross bearing thirteen gems — a Christian ideogram for Christ and His twelve 
apostles. Somehow Langdon had not expected the captain of the French police to broadcast his 
religion so openly. Then again, this was France; Christianity was not a religion here so much as a 
birthright. 

"It's a crux gemmata" Fache said suddenly. 

Startled, Langdon glanced up to find Fache's eyes on him in the reflection. 

The elevator jolted to a stop, and the doors opened. 

Langdon stepped quickly out into the hallway, eager for the wide-open space afforded by the 
famous high ceilings of the Louvre galleries. The world into which he stepped, however, was 
nothing like he expected. 

Surprised, Langdon stopped short. 

Fache glanced over. "I gather, Mr. Langdon, you have never seen the Louvre after hours?" 

/ guess not, Langdon thought, trying to get his bearings. 

Usually impeccably illuminated, the Louvre galleries were startlingly dark tonight. Instead of the 
customary flat-white light flowing down from above, a muted red glow seemed to emanate upward 
from the baseboards — intermittent patches of red light spilling out onto the tile floors. 

As Langdon gazed down the murky corridor, he realized he should have anticipated this scene. 
Virtually all major galleries employed red service lighting at night — strategically placed, low-level, 
noninvasive lights that enabled staff members to navigate hallways and yet kept the paintings in 
relative darkness to slow the fading effects of overexposure to light. Tonight, the museum 
possessed an almost oppressive quality. Long shadows encroached everywhere, and the usually 
soaring vaulted ceilings appeared as a low, black void. 

"This way," Fache said, turning sharply right and setting out through a series of interconnected 
galleries. 

Langdon followed, his vision slowly adjusting to the dark. All around, large-format oils began to 
materialize like photos developing before him in an enormous darkroom... their eyes following as 



he moved through the rooms. He could taste the familiar tang of museum air — an arid, deionized 
essence that carried a faint hint of carbon — the product of industrial, coal-filter dehumidifiers that 
ran around the clock to counteract the corrosive carbon dioxide exhaled by visitors. 

Mounted high on the walls, the visible security cameras sent a clear message to visitors: We see 
you. Do not touch anything. 

"Any of them real?" Langdon asked, motioning to the cameras. 

Fache shook his head. "Of course not." 

Langdon was not surprised. Video surveillance in museums this size was cost-prohibitive and 
ineffective. With acres of galleries to watch over, the Louvre would require several hundred 
technicians simply to monitor the feeds. Most large museums now used "containment security." 
Forget keeping thieves out. Keep them in. Containment was activated after hours, and if an intruder 
removed a piece of artwork, compartmentalized exits would seal around that gallery, and the thief 
would find himself behind bars even before the police arrived. 

The sound of voices echoed down the marble corridor up ahead. The noise seemed to be coming 
from a large recessed alcove that lay ahead on the right. A bright light spilled out into the hallway. 

"Office of the curator," the captain said. 

As he and Fache drew nearer the alcove, Langdon peered down a short hallway, into Sauniere's 
luxurious study — warm wood, Old Master paintings, and an enormous antique desk on which stood 
a two-foot-tall model of a knight in full armor. A handful of police agents bustled about the room, 
talking on phones and taking notes. One of them was seated at Sauniere's desk, typing into a 
laptop. Apparently, the curator's private office had become DCPJ's makeshift command post for the 
evening. 

"Messieurs, " Fache called out, and the men turned. "Ne nous derangez pas sous aucun pretexte. 
Entendu?" 

Everyone inside the office nodded their understanding. 

Langdon had hung enough NE PAS DERANGER signs on hotel room doors to catch the gist of the 
captain's orders. Fache and Langdon were not to be disturbed under any circumstances. 

Leaving the small congregation of agents behind, Fache led Langdon farther down the darkened 
hallway. Thirty yards ahead loomed the gateway to the Louvre's most popular section — la Grande 
Galerie — a seemingly endless corridor that housed the Louvre's most valuable Italian masterpieces. 
Langdon had already discerned that this was where Sauniere's body lay; the Grand Gallery's 
famous parquet floor had been unmistakable in the Polaroid. 



As they approached, Langdon saw the entrance was blocked by an enormous steel grate that looked 
like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies. 

"Containment security, " Fache said, as they neared the grate. 

Even in the darkness, the barricade looked like it could have restrained a tank. Arriving outside, 
Langdon peered through the bars into the dimly lit caverns of the Grand Gallery. 

"After you, Mr. Langdon," Fache said. 

Langdon turned. After me, where ? 

Fache motioned toward the floor at the base of the grate. 

Langdon looked down. In the darkness, he hadn't noticed. The barricade was raised about two feet, 
providing an awkward clearance underneath. 

"This area is still off limits to Louvre security," Fache said. "My team from Police Technique et 
Scientifique has just finished their investigation." He motioned to the opening. "Please slide under." 

Langdon stared at the narrow crawl space at his feet and then up at the massive iron grate. He's 
kidding, right? The barricade looked like a guillotine waiting to crush intruders. 

Fache grumbled something in French and checked his watch. Then he dropped to his knees and 
slithered his bulky frame underneath the grate. On the other side, he stood up and looked back 
through the bars at Langdon. 

Langdon sighed. Placing his palms flat on the polished parquet, he lay on his stomach and pulled 
himself forward. As he slid underneath, the nape of his Harris tweed snagged on the bottom of the 
grate, and he cracked the back of his head on the iron. 

Very suave, Robert, he thought, fumbling and then finally pulling himself through. As he stood up, 
Langdon was beginning to suspect it was going to be a very long night. 



CHAPTER 5 

Murray Hill Place — the new Opus Dei World Headquarters and conference center — is located at 
243 Lexington Avenue in New York City. With a price tag of just over $47 million, the 133,000- 
square-foot tower is clad in red brick and Indiana limestone. Designed by May & Pinska, the 
building contains over one hundred bedrooms, six dining rooms, libraries, living rooms, meeting 



rooms, and offices. The second, eighth, and sixteenth floors contain chapels, ornamented with mill- 
work and marble. The seventeenth floor is entirely residential. Men enter the building through the 
main doors on Lexington Avenue. Women enter through a side street and are "acoustically and 
visually separated" from the men at all times within the building. 

Earlier this evening, within the sanctuary of his penthouse apartment, Bishop Manuel Aringarosa 
had packed a small travel bag and dressed in a traditional black cassock. Normally, he would have 
wrapped a purple cincture around his waist, but tonight he would be traveling among the public, 
and he preferred not to draw attention to his high office. Only those with a keen eye would notice 
his 14-karat gold bishop's ring with purple amethyst, large diamonds, and hand-tooled mitre- 
crozier applique. Throwing the travel bag over his shoulder, he said a silent prayer and left his 
apartment, descending to the lobby where his driver was waiting to take him to the airport. 

Now, sitting aboard a commercial airliner bound for Rome, Aringarosa gazed out the window at 
the dark Atlantic. The sun had already set, but Aringarosa knew his own star was on the rise. 
Tonight the battle will be won, he thought, amazed that only months ago he had felt powerless 
against the hands that threatened to destroy his empire. 

As president-general of Opus Dei, Bishop Aringarosa had spent the last decade of his life spreading 
the message of "God's Work" — literally, Opus Dei. The congregation, founded in 1928 by the 
Spanish priest Josemaria Escriva, promoted a return to conservative Catholic values and 
encouraged its members to make sweeping sacrifices in their own lives in order to do the Work of 
God. 

Opus Dei's traditionalist philosophy initially had taken root in Spain before Franco's regime, but 
with the 1934 publication of Josemaria Escriva's spiritual book The Way — 999 points of meditation 
for doing God's Work in one's own life — Escriva's message exploded across the world. Now, with 
over four million copies of The Way in circulation in forty-two languages, Opus Dei was a global 
force. Its residence halls, teaching centers, and even universities could be found in almost every 
major metropolis on earth. Opus Dei was the fastest-growing and most financially secure Catholic 
organization in the world. Unfortunately, Aringarosa had learned, in an age of religious cynicism, 
cults, and televangelists, Opus Dei's escalating wealth and power was a magnet for suspicion. 

"Many call Opus Dei a brainwashing cult," reporters often challenged. "Others call you an 
ultraconservative Christian secret society. Which are you?" 

"Opus Dei is neither," the bishop would patiently reply. "We are a Catholic Church. We are a 
congregation of Catholics who have chosen as our priority to follow Catholic doctrine as rigorously 
as we can in our own daily lives." 

"Does God's Work necessarily include vows of chastity, tithing, and atonement for sins through 
self-flagellation and the cilice?" 



"You are describing only a small portion of the Opus Dei population," Aringarosa said. "There are 
many levels of involvement. Thousands of Opus Dei members are married, have families, and do 
God's Work in their own communities. Others choose lives of asceticism within our cloistered 
residence halls. These choices are personal, but everyone in Opus Dei shares the goal of bettering 
the world by doing the Work of God. Surely this is an admirable quest." 

Reason seldom worked, though. The media always gravitated toward scandal, and Opus Dei, like 
most large organizations, had within its membership a few misguided souls who cast a shadow 
over the entire group. 

Two months ago, an Opus Dei group at a midwestern university had been caught drugging new 
recruits with mescaline in an effort to induce a euphoric state that neophytes would perceive as a 
religious experience. Another university student had used his barbed cilice belt more often than the 
recommended two hours a day and had given himself a near lethal infection. In Boston not long 
ago, a disillusioned young investment banker had signed over his entire life savings to Opus Dei 
before attempting suicide. 

Misguided sheep, Aringarosa thought, his heart going out to them. 

Of course the ultimate embarrassment had been the widely publicized trial of FBI spy Robert 
Hanssen, who, in addition to being a prominent member of Opus Dei, had turned out to be a sexual 
deviant, his trial uncovering evidence that he had rigged hidden video cameras in his own bedroom 
so his friends could watch him having sex with his wife. "Hardly the pastime of a devout Catholic," 
the judge had noted. 

Sadly, all of these events had helped spawn the new watch group known as the Opus Dei 
Awareness Network (ODAN). The group's popular website — www.odan.org — relayed frightening 
stories from former Opus Dei members who warned of the dangers of joining. The media was now 
referring to Opus Dei as "God's Mafia" and "the Cult of Christ." 

We fear what we do not understand, Aringarosa thought, wondering if these critics had any idea 
how many lives Opus Dei had enriched. The group enjoyed the full endorsement and blessing of 
the Vatican. Opus Dei is a personal prelature of the Pope himself. 

Recently, however, Opus Dei had found itself threatened by a force infinitely more powerful than 
the media... an unexpected foe from which Aringarosa could not possibly hide. Five months ago, 
the kaleidoscope of power had been shaken, and Aringarosa was still reeling from the blow. 

"They know not the war they have begun," Aringarosa whispered to himself, staring out the plane's 
window at the darkness of the ocean below. For an instant, his eyes refocused, lingering on the 
reflection of his awkward face — dark and oblong, dominated by a flat, crooked nose that had been 
shattered by a fist in Spain when he was a young missionary. The physical flaw barely registered 
now. Aringarosa's was a world of the soul, not of the flesh. 



As the jet passed over the coast of Portugal, the cell phone in Aringarosa's cassock began vibrating 
in silent ring mode. Despite airline regulations prohibiting the use of cell phones during flights, 
Aringarosa knew this was a call he could not miss. Only one man possessed this number, the man 
who had mailed Aringarosa the phone. 

Excited, the bishop answered quietly. "Yes?" 

"Silas has located the keystone," the caller said. "It is in Paris. Within the Church of Saint-Sulpice." 

Bishop Aringarosa smiled. "Then we are close." 

"We can obtain it immediately. But we need your influence." 

"Of course. Tell me what to do." 

When Aringarosa switched off the phone, his heart was pounding. He gazed once again into the 
void of night, feeling dwarfed by the events he had put into motion. 



Five hundred miles away, the albino named Silas stood over a small basin of water and dabbed the 
blood from his back, watching the patterns of red spinning in the water. Purge me with hyssop and 
I shall be clean, he prayed, quoting Psalms. Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. 

Silas was feeling an aroused anticipation that he had not felt since his previous life. It both 
surprised and electrified him. For the last decade, he had been following The Way, cleansing 
himself of sins... rebuilding his life... erasing the violence in his past. Tonight, however, it had all 
come rushing back. The hatred he had fought so hard to bury had been summoned. He had been 
startled how quickly his past had resurfaced. And with it, of course, had come his skills. Rusty but 
serviceable. 

Jesus' message is one of peace... of nonviolence... of love. This was the message Silas had been 
taught from the beginning, and the message he held in his heart. And yet this was the message the 
enemies of Christ now threatened to destroy. Those who threaten God with force will be met with 
force. Immovable and steadfast. 

For two millennia, Christian soldiers had defended their faith against those who tried to displace it. 
Tonight, Silas had been called to battle. 

Drying his wounds, he donned his ankle-length, hooded robe. It was plain, made of dark wool, 
accentuating the whiteness of his skin and hair. Tightening the rope-tie around his waist, he raised 
the hood over his head and allowed his red eyes to admire his reflection in the mirror. The wheels 
are in motion. 



CHAPTER 6 

Having squeezed beneath the security gate, Robert Langdon now stood just inside the entrance to 
the Grand Gallery. He was staring into the mouth of a long, deep canyon. On either side of the 
gallery, stark walls rose thirty feet, evaporating into the darkness above. The reddish glow of the 
service lighting sifted upward, casting an unnatural smolder across a staggering collection of Da 
Vincis, Titians, and Caravaggios that hung suspended from ceiling cables. Still lifes, religious 
scenes, and landscapes accompanied portraits of nobility and politicians. 

Although the Grand Gallery housed the Louvre's most famous Italian art, many visitors felt the 
wing's most stunning offering was actually its famous parquet floor. Laid out in a dazzling 
geometric design of diagonal oak slats, the floor produced an ephemeral optical illusion — a multi- 
dimensional network that gave visitors the sense they were floating through the gallery on a surface 
that changed with every step. 

As Langdon's gaze began to trace the inlay, his eyes stopped short on an unexpected object lying 
on the floor just a few yards to his left, surrounded by police tape. He spun toward Fache. "Is that... 
a Caravaggio on the floor?" 

Fache nodded without even looking. 

The painting, Langdon guessed, was worth upward of two million dollars, and yet it was lying on 
the floor like a discarded poster. "What the devil is it doing on the floor!" 

Fache glowered, clearly unmoved. "This is a crime scene, Mr. Langdon. We have touched nothing. 
That canvas was pulled from the wall by the curator. It was how he activated the security system." 

Langdon looked back at the gate, trying to picture what had happened. 

"The curator was attacked in his office, fled into the Grand Gallery, and activated the security gate 
by pulling that painting from the wall. The gate fell immediately, sealing off all access. This is the 
only door in or out of this gallery." 

Langdon felt confused. "So the curator actually captured his attacker inside the Grand Gallery?" 

Fache shook his head. "The security gate separated Sauniere from his attacker. The killer was 
locked out there in the hallway and shot Sauniere through this gate." Fache pointed toward an 
orange tag hanging from one of the bars on the gate under which they had just passed. "The PTS 
team found flashback residue from a gun. He fired through the bars. Sauniere died in here alone." 



Langdon pictured the photograph of Sauniere's body. They said he did that to himself. Langdon 
looked out at the enormous corridor before them. "So where is his body?" 

Fache straightened his cruciform tie clip and began to walk. "As you probably know, the Grand 
Gallery is quite long." 

The exact length, if Langdon recalled correctly, was around fifteen hundred feet, the length of three 
Washington Monuments laid end to end. Equally breathtaking was the corridor's width, which 
easily could have accommodated a pair of side-by-side passenger trains. The center of the hallway 
was dotted by the occasional statue or colossal porcelain urn, which served as a tasteful divider and 
kept the flow of traffic moving down one wall and up the other. 

Fache was silent now, striding briskly up the right side of the corridor with his gaze dead ahead. 
Langdon felt almost disrespectful to be racing past so many masterpieces without pausing for so 
much as a glance. 

Not that I could see anything in this lighting, he thought. 

The muted crimson lighting unfortunately conjured memories of Langdon' s last experience in 
noninvasive lighting in the Vatican Secret Archives. This was tonight's second unsettling parallel 
with his near-death in Rome. He flashed on Vittoria again. She had been absent from his dreams 
for months. Langdon could not believe Rome had been only a year ago; it felt like decades. 
Another life. His last correspondence from Vittoria had been in December — a postcard saying she 
was headed to the Java Sea to continue her research in entanglement physics... something about 
using satellites to track manta ray migrations. Langdon had never harbored delusions that a woman 
like Vittoria Vetra could have been happy living with him on a college campus, but their encounter 
in Rome had unlocked in him a longing he never imagined he could feel. His lifelong affinity for 
bachelorhood and the simple freedoms it allowed had been shaken somehow... replaced by an 
unexpected emptiness that seemed to have grown over the past year. 

They continued walking briskly, yet Langdon still saw no corpse. "Jacques Sauniere went this 
far?" 

"Mr. Sauniere suffered a bullet wound to his stomach. He died very slowly. Perhaps over fifteen or 
twenty minutes. He was obviously a man of great personal strength." 

Langdon turned, appalled. "Security took fifteen minutes to get here?" 

"Of course not. Louvre security responded immediately to the alarm and found the Grand Gallery 
sealed. Through the gate, they could hear someone moving around at the far end of the corridor, 
but they could not see who it was. They shouted, but they got no answer. Assuming it could only 
be a criminal, they followed protocol and called in the Judicial Police. We took up positions within 
fifteen minutes. When we arrived, we raised the barricade enough to slip underneath, and I sent a 



dozen armed agents inside. They swept the length of the gallery to corner the intruder." 

"And?" 

"They found no one inside. Except..." He pointed farther down the hall. "Him." 

Langdon lifted his gaze and followed Fache's outstretched finger. At first he thought Fache was 
pointing to a large marble statue in the middle of the hallway. As they continued, though, Langdon 
began to see past the statue. Thirty yards down the hall, a single spotlight on a portable pole stand 
shone down on the floor, creating a stark island of white light in the dark crimson gallery. In the 
center of the light, like an insect under a microscope, the corpse of the curator lay naked on the 
parquet floor. 

"You saw the photograph," Fache said, "so this should be of no surprise." 

Langdon felt a deep chill as they approached the body. Before him was one of the strangest images 
he had ever seen. 



The pallid corpse of Jacques Sauniere lay on the parquet floor exactly as it appeared in the 
photograph. As Langdon stood over the body and squinted in the harsh light, he reminded himself 
to his amazement that Sauniere had spent his last minutes of life arranging his own body in this 
strange fashion. 

Sauniere looked remarkably fit for a man of his years... and all of his musculature was in plain 
view. He had stripped off every shred of clothing, placed it neatly on the floor, and laid down on 
his back in the center of the wide corridor, perfectly aligned with the long axis of the room. His 
arms and legs were sprawled outward in a wide spread eagle, like those of a child making a snow 
angel... or, perhaps more appropriately, like a man being drawn and quartered by some invisible 
force. 

Just below Sauniere's breastbone, a bloody smear marked the spot where the bullet had pierced his 
flesh. The wound had bled surprisingly little, leaving only a small pool of blackened blood. 

Sauniere's left index finger was also bloody, apparently having been dipped into the wound to 
create the most unsettling aspect of his own macabre deathbed; using his own blood as ink, and 
employing his own naked abdomen as a canvas, Sauniere had drawn a simple symbol on his 
flesh — five straight lines that intersected to form a five-pointed star. 

The pentacle. 

The bloody star, centered on Sauniere's navel, gave his corpse a distinctly ghoulish aura. The photo 



Langdon had seen was chilling enough, but now, witnessing the scene in person, Langdon felt a 
deepening uneasiness. 

He did this to himself. 

"Mr. Langdon?" Fache's dark eyes settled on him again. 

"It's a pentacle," Langdon offered, his voice feeling hollow in the huge space. "One of the oldest 
symbols on earth. Used over four thousand years before Christ." 

"And what does it mean?" 

Langdon always hesitated when he got this question. Telling someone what a symbol "meant" was 
like telling them how a song should make them feel — it was different for all people. A white Ku 
Klux Klan headpiece conjured images of hatred and racism in the United States, and yet the same 
costume carried a meaning of religious faith in Spain. 

"Symbols carry different meanings in different settings," Langdon said. "Primarily, the pentacle is 
a pagan religious symbol." 

Fache nodded. "Devil worship." 

"No," Langdon corrected, immediately realizing his choice of vocabulary should have been clearer. 

Nowadays, the term pagan had become almost synonymous with devil worship — a gross 
misconception. The word's roots actually reached back to the Latin paganus, meaning country- 
dwellers. "Pagans" were literally unindoctrinated country-folk who clung to the old, rural religions 
of Nature worship. In fact, so strong was the Church's fear of those who lived in the rural villes that 
the once innocuous word for "villager" — villain — came to mean a wicked soul. 

"The pentacle," Langdon clarified, "is a pre-Christian symbol that relates to Nature worship. The 
ancients envisioned their world in two halves — masculine and feminine. Their gods and goddesses 
worked to keep a balance of power. Yin and yang. When male and female were balanced, there 
was harmony in the world. When they were unbalanced, there was chaos." Langdon motioned to 
Sauniere's stomach. "This pentacle is representative of the female half of all things — a concept 
religious historians call the 'sacred feminine' or the 'divine goddess.' Sauniere, of all people, would 
know this." 

"Sauniere drew a goddess symbol on his stomach?" 

Langdon had to admit, it seemed odd. "In its most specific interpretation, the pentacle symbolizes 
Venus — the goddess of female sexual love and beauty." 



Fache eyed the naked man, and grunted. 

"Early religion was based on the divine order of Nature. The goddess Venus and the planet Venus 
were one and the same. The goddess had a place in the nighttime sky and was known by many 
names — Venus, the Eastern Star, Ishtar, Astarte — all of them powerful female concepts with ties to 
Nature and Mother Earth. " 

Fache looked more troubled now, as if he somehow preferred the idea of devil worship. 

Langdon decided not to share the pentacle's most astonishing property — the graphic origin of its 
ties to Venus. As a young astronomy student, Langdon had been stunned to learn the planet Venus 
traced a perfect pentacle across the ecliptic sky every four years. So astonished were the ancients to 
observe this phenomenon, that Venus and her pentacle became symbols of perfection, beauty, and 
the cyclic qualities of sexual love. As a tribute to the magic of Venus, the Greeks used her four- 
year cycle to organize their Olympiads. Nowadays, few people realized that the four-year schedule 
of modern Olympic Games still followed the cycles of Venus. Even fewer people knew that the 
five-pointed star had almost become the official Olympic seal but was modified at the last 
moment — its five points exchanged for five intersecting rings to better reflect the games' spirit of 
inclusion and harmony. 

"Mr. Langdon," Fache said abruptly. "Obviously, the pentacle must also relate to the devil. Your 
American horror movies make that point clearly." 

Langdon frowned. Thank you, Hollywood. The five-pointed star was now a virtual cliche in Satanic 
serial killer movies, usually scrawled on the wall of some Satanist's apartment along with other 
alleged demonic symbology. Langdon was always frustrated when he saw the symbol in this 
context; the pentacle's true origins were actually quite godly. 

"I assure you," Langdon said, "despite what you see in the movies, the pentacle's demonic 
interpretation is historically inaccurate. The original feminine meaning is correct, but the 
symbolism of the pentacle has been distorted over the millennia. In this case, through bloodshed." 

"I'm not sure I follow." 

Langdon glanced at Fache's crucifix, uncertain how to phrase his next point. "The Church, sir. 
Symbols are very resilient, but the pentacle was altered by the early Roman Catholic Church. As 
part of the Vatican's campaign to eradicate pagan religions and convert the masses to Christianity, 
the Church launched a smear campaign against the pagan gods and goddesses, recasting their 
divine symbols as evil. " 

"Goon." 

"This is very common in times of turmoil," Langdon continued. "A newly emerging power will 



take over the existing symbols and degrade them over time in an attempt to erase their meaning. In 
the battle between the pagan symbols and Christian symbols, the pagans lost; Poseidon's trident 
became the devil's pitchfork, the wise crone's pointed hat became the symbol of a witch, and 
Venus's pentacle became a sign of the devil." Langdon paused. "Unfortunately, the United States 
military has also perverted the pentacle; it's now our foremost symbol of war. We paint it on all our 
fighter jets and hang it on the shoulders of all our generals." So much for the goddess of love and 
beauty. 

"Interesting." Fache nodded toward the spread-eagle corpse. "And the positioning of the body? 
What do you make of that?" 

Langdon shrugged. "The position simply reinforces the reference to the pentacle and sacred 
feminine." 

Fache's expression clouded. "I beg your pardon?" 

"Replication. Repeating a symbol is the simplest way to strengthen its meaning. Jacques Sauniere 
positioned himself in the shape of a five-pointed star." If one pentacle is good, two is better. 

Fache's eyes followed the five points of Sauniere's arms, legs, and head as he again ran a hand 
across his slick hair. "Interesting analysis." He paused. "And the nudity?" He grumbled as he spoke 
the word, sounding repulsed by the sight of an aging male body. "Why did he remove his 
clothing?" 

Damned good question, Langdon thought. He'd been wondering the same thing ever since he first 
saw the Polaroid. His best guess was that a naked human form was yet another endorsement of 
Venus — the goddess of human sexuality. Although modern culture had erased much of Venus's 
association with the male/female physical union, a sharp etymological eye could still spot a vestige 
of Venus's original meaning in the word "venereal." Langdon decided not to go there. 

"Mr. Fache, I obviously can't tell you why Mr. Sauniere drew that symbol on himself or placed 
himself in this way, but I can tell you that a man like Jacques Sauniere would consider the pentacle 
a sign of the female deity. The correlation between this symbol and the sacred feminine is widely 
known by art historians and symbologists." 

"Fine. And the use of his own blood as ink?" 

"Obviously he had nothing else to write with." 

Fache was silent a moment. "Actually, I believe he used blood such that the police would follow 
certain forensic procedures." 

"I'm sorry?" 



"Look at his left hand." 

Langdon's eyes traced the length of the curator's pale arm to his left hand but saw nothing. 
Uncertain, he circled the corpse and crouched down, now noting with surprise that the curator was 
clutching a large, felt-tipped marker. 

"Sauniere was holding it when we found him," Fache said, leaving Langdon and moving several 
yards to a portable table covered with investigation tools, cables, and assorted electronic gear. "As 
I told you," he said, rummaging around the table, "we have touched nothing. Are you familiar with 
this kind of pen?" 

Langdon knelt down farther to see the pen's label. 

STYLO DE LUMIERE NOIRE. 

He glanced up in surprise. 

The black-light pen or watermark stylus was a specialized felt-tipped marker originally designed 
by museums, restorers, and forgery police to place invisible marks on items. The stylus wrote in a 
noncorrosive, alcohol-based fluorescent ink that was visible only under black light. Nowadays, 
museum maintenance staffs carried these markers on their daily rounds to place invisible "tick 
marks" on the frames of paintings that needed restoration. 

As Langdon stood up, Fache walked over to the spotlight and turned it off. The gallery plunged 
into sudden darkness. 

Momentarily blinded, Langdon felt a rising uncertainty. Fache's silhouette appeared, illuminated in 
bright purple. He approached carrying a portable light source, which shrouded him in a violet haze. 

"As you may know," Fache said, his eyes luminescing in the violet glow, "police use black-light 
illumination to search crime scenes for blood and other forensic evidence. So you can imagine our 
surprise..." Abruptly, he pointed the light down at the corpse. 

Langdon looked down and jumped back in shock. 

His heart pounded as he took in the bizarre sight now glowing before him on the parquet floor. 
Scrawled in luminescent handwriting, the curator's final words glowed purple beside his corpse. As 
Langdon stared at the shimmering text, he felt the fog that had surrounded this entire night growing 
thicker. 

Langdon read the message again and looked up at Fache. "What the hell does this mean!" 

Fache's eyes shone white. "That, monsieur, is precisely the question you are here to answer." 



Not far away, inside Sauniere's office, Lieutenant Collet had returned to the Louvre and was 
huddled over an audio console set up on the curator's enormous desk. With the exception of the 
eerie, robot-like doll of a medieval knight that seemed to be staring at him from the corner of 
Sauniere's desk, Collet was comfortable. He adjusted his AKG headphones and checked the input 
levels on the hard-disk recording system. All systems were go. The microphones were functioning 
flawlessly, and the audio feed was crystal clear. 

he moment de verite, he mused. 

Smiling, he closed his eyes and settled in to enjoy the rest of the conversation now being taped 
inside the Grand Gallery. 



CHAPTER 7 

The modest dwelling within the Church of Saint-Sulpice was located on the second floor of the 
church itself, to the left of the choir balcony. A two-room suite with a stone floor and minimal 
furnishings, it had been home to Sister Sandrine Bieil for over a decade. The nearby convent was 
her formal residence, if anyone asked, but she preferred the quiet of the church and had made 
herself quite comfortable upstairs with a bed, phone, and hot plate. 

As the church's conservatrice d'affaires, Sister Sandrine was responsible for overseeing all 
nonreligious aspects of church operations — general maintenance, hiring support staff and guides, 
securing the building after hours, and ordering supplies like communion wine and wafers. 

Tonight, asleep in her small bed, she awoke to the shrill of her telephone. Tiredly, she lifted the 
receiver. 

"Soeur Sandrine. Eglise Saint-Sulpice. " 

"Hello, Sister," the man said in French. 

Sister Sandrine sat up. What time is it? Although she recognized her boss's voice, in fifteen years 
she had never been awoken by him. The abbe was a deeply pious man who went home to bed 
immediately after mass. 

"I apologize if I have awoken you, Sister," the abbe said, his own voice sounding groggy and on 
edge. "I have a favor to ask of you. I just received a call from an influential American bishop. 



Perhaps you know him? Manuel Aringarosa?" 

"The head of Opus Dei?" Of course I know of him. Who in the Church doesn't? Aringarosa's 
conservative prelature had grown powerful in recent years. Their ascension to grace was jump- 
started in 1982 when Pope John Paul II unexpectedly elevated them to a "personal prelature of the 
Pope," officially sanctioning all of their practices. Suspiciously, Opus Dei's elevation occurred the 
same year the wealthy sect allegedly had transferred almost one billion dollars into the Vatican's 
Institute for Religious Works — commonly known as the Vatican Bank — bailing it out of an 
embarrassing bankruptcy. In a second maneuver that raised eyebrows, the Pope placed the founder 
of Opus Dei on the "fast track" for sainthood, accelerating an often century-long waiting period for 
canonization to a mere twenty years. Sister Sandrine could not help but feel that Opus Dei's good 
standing in Rome was suspect, but one did not argue with the Holy See. 

"Bishop Aringarosa called to ask me a favor," the abbe told her, his voice nervous. "One of his 
numeraries is in Paris tonight...." 

As Sister Sandrine listened to the odd request, she felt a deepening confusion. "I'm sorry, you say 
this visiting Opus Dei numerary cannot wait until morning?" 

"I'm afraid not. His plane leaves very early. He has always dreamed of seeing Saint-Sulpice." 

"But the church is far more interesting by day. The sun's rays through the oculus, the graduated 
shadows on the gnomon, this is what makes Saint-Sulpice unique." 

"Sister, I agree, and yet I would consider it a personal favor if you could let him in tonight. He can 
be there at... say one o'clock? That's in twenty minutes." 

Sister Sandrine frowned. "Of course. It would be my pleasure." 

The abbe thanked her and hung up. 

Puzzled, Sister Sandrine remained a moment in the warmth of her bed, trying to shake off the 
cobwebs of sleep. Her sixty-year-old body did not awake as fast as it used to, although tonight's 
phone call had certainly roused her senses. Opus Dei had always made her uneasy. Beyond the 
prelature's adherence to the arcane ritual of corporal mortification, their views on women were 
medieval at best. She had been shocked to learn that female numeraries were forced to clean the 
men's residence halls for no pay while the men were at mass; women slept on hardwood floors, 
while the men had straw mats; and women were forced to endure additional requirements of 
corporal mortification... all as added penance for original sin. It seemed Eve's bite from the apple 
of knowledge was a debt women were doomed to pay for eternity. Sadly, while most of the 
Catholic Church was gradually moving in the right direction with respect to women's rights, Opus 
Dei threatened to reverse the progress. Even so, Sister Sandrine had her orders. 



Swinging her legs off the bed, she stood slowly, chilled by the cold stone on the soles of her bare 
feet. As the chill rose through her flesh, she felt an unexpected apprehension. 

Women's intuition? 

A follower of God, Sister Sandrine had learned to find peace in the calming voices of her own soul. 
Tonight, however, those voices were as silent as the empty church around her. 



CHAPTER 8 

Langdon couldn't tear his eyes from the glowing purple text scrawled across the parquet floor. 
Jacques Sauniere's final communication seemed as unlikely a departing message as any Langdon 
could imagine. 



The message read: 



13-3-2-21-1-1-8-5 

O, Draconian devil ! 

Oh, lame saint! 



Although Langdon had not the slightest idea what it meant, he did understand Fache's instinct that 
the pentacle had something to do with devil worship. 

O, Draconian devil! 

Sauniere had left a literal reference to the devil. Equally as bizarre was the series of numbers. "Part 
of it looks like a numeric cipher. " 

"Yes," Fache said. "Our cryptographers are already working on it. We believe these numbers may 
be the key to who killed him. Maybe a telephone exchange or some kind of social identification. 
Do the numbers have any symbolic meaning to you?" 

Langdon looked again at the digits, sensing it would take him hours to extract any symbolic 
meaning. If Sauniere had even intended any. To Langdon, the numbers looked totally random. He 
was accustomed to symbolic progressions that made some semblance of sense, but everything 
here — the pentacle, the text, the numbers — seemed disparate at the most fundamental level. 

"You alleged earlier," Fache said, "that Sauniere's actions here were all in an effort to send some 
sort of message... goddess worship or something in that vein? How does this message fit in?" 



Langdon knew the question was rhetorical. This bizarre communique obviously did not fit 
Langdon's scenario of goddess worship at all. 

O, Draconian devil? Oh, lame saint? 

Fache said, "This text appears to be an accusation of some sort. Wouldn't you agree?" 

Langdon tried to imagine the curator's final minutes trapped alone in the Grand Gallery, knowing 
he was about to die. It seemed logical. "An accusation against his murderer makes sense, I 
suppose." 

"My job, of course, is to put a name to that person. Let me ask you this, Mr. Langdon. To your eye, 
beyond the numbers, what about this message is most strange?" 

Most strange? A dying man had barricaded himself in the gallery, drawn a pentacle on himself, and 
scrawled a mysterious accusation on the floor. What about the scenario wasn't strange? 

"The word 'Draconian'?" he ventured, offering the first thing that came to mind. Langdon was 
fairly certain that a reference to Draco — the ruthless seventh-century B.C. politician — was an 
unlikely dying thought. " 'Draconian devil' seems an odd choice of vocabulary." 

"Draconian?" Fache's tone came with a tinge of impatience now. "Sauniere's choice of vocabulary 
hardly seems the primary issue here." 

Langdon wasn't sure what issue Fache had in mind, but he was starting to suspect that Draco and 
Fache would have gotten along well. 

"Sauniere was a Frenchman," Fache said flatly. "He lived in Paris. And yet he chose to write this 
message..." 

"In English," Langdon said, now realizing the captain's meaning. 

Fache nodded. "Precisement. Any idea why?" 

Langdon knew Sauniere spoke impeccable English, and yet the reason he had chosen English as 
the language in which to write his final words escaped Langdon. He shrugged. 

Fache motioned back to the pentacle on Sauniere's abdomen. "Nothing to do with devil worship? 
Are you still certain?" 

Langdon was certain of nothing anymore. "The symbology and text don't seem to coincide. I'm 
sorry I can't be of more help." 



"Perhaps this will clarify." Fache backed away from the body and raised the black light again, 
letting the beam spread out in a wider angle. "And now?" 

To Langdon's amazement, a rudimentary circle glowed around the curator's body. Sauniere had 
apparently lay down and swung the pen around himself in several long arcs, essentially inscribing 
himself inside a circle. 

In a flash, the meaning became clear. 

"The Vitruvian Man, " Langdon gasped. Sauniere had created a life-sized replica of Leonardo da 
Vinci's most famous sketch. 

Considered the most anatomically correct drawing of its day, Da Vinci's The Vitruvian Man had 
become a modern-day icon of culture, appearing on posters, mouse pads, and T-shirts around the 
world. The celebrated sketch consisted of a perfect circle in which was inscribed a nude male... his 
arms and legs outstretched in a naked spread eagle. 

Da Vinci. Langdon felt a shiver of amazement. The clarity of Sauniere's intentions could not be 
denied. In his final moments of life, the curator had stripped off his clothing and arranged his body 
in a clear image of Leonardo da Vinci's Vitruvian Man. 

The circle had been the missing critical element. A feminine symbol of protection, the circle 
around the naked man's body completed Da Vinci's intended message — male and female harmony. 
The question now, though, was why Sauniere would imitate a famous drawing. 

"Mr. Langdon," Fache said, "certainly a man like yourself is aware that Leonardo da Vinci had a 
tendency toward the darker arts." 

Langdon was surprised by Fache's knowledge of Da Vinci, and it certainly went a long way toward 
explaining the captain's suspicions about devil worship. Da Vinci had always been an awkward 
subject for historians, especially in the Christian tradition. Despite the visionary's genius, he was a 
flamboyant homosexual and worshipper of Nature's divine order, both of which placed him in a 
perpetual state of sin against God. Moreover, the artist's eerie eccentricities projected an admittedly 
demonic aura: Da Vinci exhumed corpses to study human anatomy; he kept mysterious journals in 
illegible reverse handwriting; he believed he possessed the alchemic power to turn lead into gold 
and even cheat God by creating an elixir to postpone death; and his inventions included horrific, 
never-before-imagined weapons of war and torture. 

Misunderstanding breeds distrust, Langdon thought. 

Even Da Vinci's enormous output of breathtaking Christian art only furthered the artist's reputation 
for spiritual hypocrisy. Accepting hundreds of lucrative Vatican commissions, Da Vinci painted 
Christian themes not as an expression of his own beliefs but rather as a commercial venture — a 



means of funding a lavish lifestyle. Unfortunately, Da Vinci was a prankster who often amused 
himself by quietly gnawing at the hand that fed him. He incorporated in many of his Christian 
paintings hidden symbolism that was anything but Christian — tributes to his own beliefs and a 
subtle thumbing of his nose at the Church. Langdon had even given a lecture once at the National 
Gallery in London entitled: "The Secret Life of Leonardo: Pagan Symbolism in Christian Art." 

"I understand your concerns," Langdon now said, "but Da Vinci never really practiced any dark 
arts. He was an exceptionally spiritual man, albeit one in constant conflict with the Church." As 
Langdon said this, an odd thought popped into his mind. He glanced down at the message on the 
floor again. O, Draconian devil! Oh, lame saint! 

"Yes?" Fache said. 

Langdon weighed his words carefully. "I was just thinking that Sauniere shared a lot of spiritual 
ideologies with Da Vinci, including a concern over the Church's elimination of the sacred feminine 
from modern religion. Maybe, by imitating a famous Da Vinci drawing, Sauniere was simply 
echoing some of their shared frustrations with the modern Church's demonization of the goddess." 

Fache's eyes hardened. "You think Sauniere is calling the Church a lame saint and a Draconian 
devil?" 

Langdon had to admit it seemed far-fetched, and yet the pentacle seemed to endorse the idea on 
some level. "All I am saying is that Mr. Sauniere dedicated his life to studying the history of the 
goddess, and nothing has done more to erase that history than the Catholic Church. It seems 
reasonable that Sauniere might have chosen to express his disappointment in his final good-bye." 

"Disappointment?" Fache demanded, sounding hostile now. "This message sounds more enraged 
than disappointed, wouldn't you say?" 

Langdon was reaching the end of his patience. "Captain, you asked for my instincts as to what 
Sauniere is trying to say here, and that's what I'm giving you." 

"That this is an indictment of the Church?" Fache's jaw tightened as he spoke through clenched 
teeth. "Mr. Langdon, I have seen a lot of death in my work, and let me tell you something. When a 
man is murdered by another man, I do not believe his final thoughts are to write an obscure 
spiritual statement that no one will understand. I believe he is thinking of one thing only." Fache's 
whispery voice sliced the air. "La vengeance. I believe Sauniere wrote this note to tell us who 
killed him." Langdon stared. "But that makes no sense whatsoever." 

"No?" 

"No," he fired back, tired and frustrated. "You told me Sauniere was attacked in his office by 
someone he had apparently invited in." 



"Yes." 

"So it seems reasonable to conclude that the curator knew his attacker." 

Fache nodded. "Go on." 

"So if Sauniere knew the person who killed him, what kind of indictment is this?" He pointed at the 
floor. "Numeric codes? Lame saints? Draconian devils? Pentacles on his stomach? It's all too 
cryptic." 

Fache frowned as if the idea had never occurred to him. "You have a point." 

"Considering the circumstances," Langdon said, "I would assume that if Sauniere wanted to tell 
you who killed him, he would have written down somebody's name. " 

As Langdon spoke those words, a smug smile crossed Fache's lips for the first time all night. 
"Precisement, " Fache said. "Precisement. " 



I am witnessing the work of a master, mused Lieutenant Collet as he tweaked his audio gear and 
listened to Fache's voice coming through the headphones. The agent superieur knew it was 
moments like these that had lifted the captain to the pinnacle of French law enforcement. 

Fache will do what no one else dares. 

The delicate art of cajoler was a lost skill in modern law enforcement, one that required 
exceptional poise under pressure. Few men possessed the necessary sangfroid for this kind of 
operation, but Fache seemed born for it. His restraint and patience bordered on the robotic. 

Fache's sole emotion this evening seemed to be one of intense resolve, as if this arrest were 
somehow personal to him. Fache's briefing of his agents an hour ago had been unusually succinct 
and assured. / know who murdered Jacques Sauniere, Fache had said. You know what to do. No 
mistakes tonight. 

And so far, no mistakes had been made. 

Collet was not yet privy to the evidence that had cemented Fache's certainty of their suspect's guilt, 
but he knew better than to question the instincts of the Bull. Fache's intuition seemed almost 
supernatural at times. God whispers in his ear, one agent had insisted after a particularly 
impressive display of Fache's sixth sense. Collet had to admit, if there was a God, Bezu Fache 
would be on His A-list. The captain attended mass and confession with zealous regularity — far 
more than the requisite holiday attendance fulfilled by other officials in the name of good public 



relations. When the Pope visited Paris a few years back, Fache had used all his muscle to obtain the 
honor of an audience. A photo of Fache with the Pope now hung in his office. The Papal Bull, the 
agents secretly called it. 

Collet found it ironic that one of Fache's rare popular public stances in recent years had been his 
outspoken reaction to the Catholic pedophilia scandal. These priests should be hanged twice! Fache 
had declared. Once for their crimes against children. And once for shaming the good name of the 
Catholic Church. Collet had the odd sense it was the latter that angered Fache more. 

Turning now to his laptop computer, Collet attended to the other half of his responsibilities here 
tonight — the GPS tracking system. The image onscreen revealed a detailed floor plan of the Denon 
Wing, a structural schematic uploaded from the Louvre Security Office. Letting his eyes trace the 
maze of galleries and hallways, Collet found what he was looking for. 

Deep in the heart of the Grand Gallery blinked a tiny red dot. 

La marque. 

Fache was keeping his prey on a very tight leash tonight. Wisely so. Robert Langdon had proven 
himself one cool customer.